Tracing oncogene-driven remodelling of the intestinal stem cell niche
Interactions between tumour cells and the surrounding microenvironment contribute to tumour progression, metastasis and recurrence1,2,3. Although mosaic analyses in Drosophila have advanced our understanding of such interactions4,5, it has been difficult to engineer parallel approaches in vertebrates. Here we present an oncogene-associated, multicolour reporter mouse model—the Red2Onco system—that allows differential tracing of mutant and wild-type cells in the same tissue. By applying this system to the small intestine, we show that oncogene-expressing mutant crypts alter the cellular organization of neighbouring wild-type crypts, thereby driving accelerated clonal drift. Crypts that express oncogenic KRAS or PI3K secrete BMP ligands that suppress local stem cell activity, while changes in PDGFRloCD81+ stromal cells induced by crypts with oncogenic PI3K alter the WNT signalling environment. Together, these results show how oncogene-driven paracrine remodelling creates a niche environment that is detrimental to the maintenance of wild-type tissue, promoting field transformation dominated by oncogenic clones.

Main
The tumour microenvironment (TME) constitutes a complex ecosystem that comprises mutant and wild-type (WT) cells, as well as endothelial, immune and mesenchymal cells1,2. From the earliest phase of tumour initiation, the TME adapts to signals from tumour cells3. However, little is known about how these changes affect non-malignant cells. Much of our understanding of this topic has been informed by studies in Drosophila, in which WT cells eliminate less ‘fit’ cells through ‘cell competition’4,6. Conversely, tumour cells bearing mutations in genes such as Myc, Ras or Apc can become ‘super-competitors’ that eliminate their WT neighbours5. In mammals, increasing emphasis has been placed on cell competition during tumour development7, with oncogene-driven changes in both mutant cells and the TME8 having the potential to influence neighbouring WT cells9,10 (Fig. 1a).
Multicolour reporters with oncogenes
Cell labelling strategies have been devised to study fate changes during tumour development11,12. Although such methods provide insight into factors that drive field cancerization, it has been difficult to assess how neighbouring WT cells react to, and influence, tumour growth. To study cross-talk between mutant and WT cells, previous studies have used mosaic labelling approaches13,14 to study gain and loss of function. However, challenges in the design of these approaches limit their potential. Here, to circumvent these difficulties, we adapted the multicolour Confetti reporter line15, based on the Brainbow-2.1 cassette, to include an additional cDNA cassette following the tdimer2 red fluorescent protein (RFP) cDNA (Fig. 1b). This inducible Red2Onco system allows an oncogene to be co-expressed specifically in RFP+ clones. Upon Cre activation, the R26R-Red2Onco construct stochastically recombines to express one of four fluorescent proteins, and only RFP+ clones co-express the oncogenic cDNA (Fig. 1b, c, Supplementary Video 1).
To demonstrate the utility of the Red2Onco system, we developed lines for RFP-specific co-expression of the intracellular domain (ICD) of Notch1, KrasG12D or PIK3CAH1047R. We first confirmed that RFP expression overlapped with gene expression (NOTCH1-ICD) or downstream activation (p-ERK for KRAS(G12D); p-AKT for PIK3CA(H1047R)) in intestine (Extended Data Fig. 1a, b). Consistent with their role in driving hyperplasia16,17, we found that RFP+ cells that co-expressed KrasG12D or PIK3CAH1047R showed increased proliferation (Extended Data Fig. 1c). Similarly, as expected18, Notch1ICD expression blocked differentiation of secretory cells (Extended Data Fig. 1d, e). We also confirmed the viability of the Red2Onco system in other organs (Extended Data Fig. 1f, g).
Mutant intestinal clone expansion
In mammals, the small intestine is composed of crypts and villi. All absorptive and secretory cell lineages are generated by intestinal stem cells (ISCs) that reside at the crypt base. As ISCs divide, neighbouring cells become displaced from the niche and enter into a differentiation programme. As a result, ISC-derived clones stochastically expand and contract, leading to ‘neutral drift’ of clones until they are lost or the crypt becomes monoclonal19,20.
Alongside WNT, mutations in the RAS–MAPK and PI3K–AKT pathways represent key drivers of colorectal cancer11,21,22. Unlike WNT, activation of RAS signalling does not lead to obvious changes in tissue architecture, leading to the assumption that mutations in WNT signalling may represent the first oncogenic hit. However, the discovery that KRAS mutations are abundant in the ageing human intestinal epithelium10,23, as well as in patients with Crohn’s disease24,25, raised the question of whether mutations in RAS–MAPK or PI3K–AKT signalling components could also function as drivers of early mutant clone expansion. To investigate the effects of altered gene expression on clonal competition, we performed lineage tracing in Villin-CreERT2;R26R-Red2Onco mice using a clonal dosage of tamoxifen (0.2 mg per 20 g body weight, at which each crypt on average hosts less than one labelled, ISC-derived clone) (Extended Data Fig. 2a–f). Seven days after Cre induction, mutant clones already showed evidence of biased drift (Extended Data Fig. 2g–i). Although both mutant and WT clones showed a broad distribution of sizes, both the average size and the frequency of monoclonal (fixed) crypts increased more steeply in mutant than in WT clones (Extended Data Fig. 2j, k). These findings echoed the results of previous studies based on clonal activation of KRAS using a conventional reporter construct26,27. Quantitative comparison of isolated, WT (non-red) clones with the Confetti control (Extended Data Fig. 3a–c) indicated that the modified Confetti construct had no systemic effects on clone dynamics.
To resolve the dynamics of mutant clone expansion, we invoked a modelling-based approach, the validity of which has been tested previously19,28. Within this framework, crypts are modelled as a chain of N ‘effective’ ISCs that line the circumference of the crypt base. ISC loss (at rate λ) is correlated with the duplication of a neighbour, leading to neutral drift of clone size (Supplementary Theory). Applied to the Confetti control, with an effective stem cell number for the proximal small intestine of N = 5 (ref. 28), a quantitative fit to the clone data obtained a loss-replacement rate of λ = 0.9 per week, similar to previous findings (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Following oncogene expression, mutant cells experience a survival advantage, leading to non-neutral competition. The resulting clone dynamics can be mapped to a refined model in which the loss-replacement rate acquires a bias 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1, with mutant ISCs replacing their WT neighbours at rate λ(1 + δ), whereas WT ISCs replace mutant neighbours at rate λ(1 − δ). Taking N = 5, the biased drift model predicted accurately the dynamics of clone sizes with λ = 2.4 per week and δ = 0.71 for KrasG12D (similar to previous estimates26,27), λ = 1.9 per week and δ = 0.64 for PIK3CAH1047R, and λ = 1.1 per week and δ = 0.36 for Notch1ICD (Extended Data Fig. 3d–f).
Active competition through apoptotic elimination of less-fit cells has been well documented in Drosophila and mouse epiblasts4. However, immunodetection of cleaved caspase-3 in crypts of R26R-Red2Onco mice showed no evidence of increased apoptosis (Extended Data Fig. 3g). By contrast, a two-hour pulse of 5‐ethynyl‐2′‐deoxyuridine (EdU) showed an increased number of EdU+ crypt base columnar cells in mutant clones in all three Red2Onco models (Extended Data Fig. 3h, i).
Oncogene-induced effects on neighbours
To study whether mutant clones influence the fates of WT clones in neighbouring crypts, we performed lineage tracing in Villin-CreERT2;R26R-Red2Onco mice induced at a near-clonal dosage of tamoxifen (2 mg per 20 g body weight), when more than 30% of crypts contained labelled cells. Unexpectedly, two weeks after induction, the frequency of fixed WT crypts in Red2-KrasG12D and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice had increased compared to controls (Extended Data Fig. 4a, b), which suggests that mutant cells mediate changes in the dynamics of WT cells. To dissect this phenotype, we used a clonal dosage of tamoxifen (0.2 mg per 20 g body weight) to compare the dynamics of WT clones in crypts that were either neighbouring (proximate) or remote (more than two crypt diameters) from crypts containing a mutant clone (Fig. 1d). Notably, WT clones that were proximate to mutant crypts showed accelerated drift in Red2-KrasG12D and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice, greatly exceeding that in remote WT crypts or Confetti controls (Fig. 1e, f). These observations were corroborated by quantification of clone size, which showed a corresponding increase in average clone size and fixation rate (Extended Data Fig. 4c, d). Furthermore, when segregated according to whether clones were oriented towards (inner) or away (outer) from a neighbouring mutant crypt, the clone size distributions were comparable, suggesting that accelerated dynamics take place in the context of neutral competition (Extended Data Fig. 4e–g).
To make a further quantitative assessment of WT clones in crypts that neighbour mutant crypts we noted that, before fixation, neutral clone dynamics are predicted to enter a scaling regime in which the size distribution depends only on the composite drift rate λ/N2 (Supplementary Theory)19. Comparison of the clone size data showed convergence onto the predicted scaling form in both Confetti control and mutant conditions (Fig. 2a). From a fit to the average clone size, we found a drift rate that was 1.9 times larger in clones that were proximate to mutant crypts compared to Confetti controls (Fig. 2b, Extended Data Fig. 4h, Supplementary Theory).

To resolve the origin of accelerated drift, we considered whether the rate of ISC loss or replacement had increased (Extended Data Fig. 4i). However, measurements of the ISC proliferation rate based on EdU incorporation showed similar values (Fig. 2c, d), independent of the proximity of WT clones to mutant crypts, which suggests that the loss–replacement rate had not changed. We then estimated the number of ISCs on the basis of Lgr5-driven EGFP expression. When the majority of mutant crypts were already fixed, we found that the number of LGR5–EGFP+ cells was 20% lower in WT crypts neighbouring mutant crypts than in remote WT crypts (Fig. 2e, f). Similar results were found when we used OLFM4 expression (Extended Data Fig. 4j). These findings suggest that accelerated clonal drift is associated with a reduction in the number of stem cells29.
An observed reduction in the physical size of WT crypts neighbouring mutant crypts (Extended Data Fig. 5a–c) led us to investigate whether the change in ISC number is associated with deformation of surrounding tissue by the increase in size of mutant crypts. However, from measurements of the circularity of WT crypts, we found no evidence for an effect of local mechanical strain (Extended Data Fig. 5d, e). We then reasoned that, if the effect were mediated by paracrine factors from mutant cells, it should scale with the multiplicity of neighbouring mutant crypts (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Consistently, when proximate to multiple mutant crypts, WT clones from Red2-KrasG12D and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice showed increased rates of clonal drift and fixation alongside a further reduction in ISC number and crypt size (Extended Data Fig. 5g–l).
Finally, we questioned whether mutation-induced changes promote field expansion. Notably, in contrast to Confetti and Red2-Notch1ICD mice, the fraction of mutant crypts increased steadily in Red2-KrasG12D and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice at the expense of WT crypts (Extended Data Fig. 5m, n). We then used the abundance of ‘cojoined’ crypts to estimate the relative frequency of crypt fission and fusion (Extended Data Fig. 5o). Following a previous study30, we found that crypts mutant for KrasG12D and PIK3CAH1047R showed increased rates of fission and fusion compared to Confetti controls (Extended Data Fig. 5p), which suggests that the deleterious effects of mutant crypts on neighbouring WT crypts contribute to field transformation.
Comparative single-cell analysis
To define the mechanisms that mediate cross-talk, we exploited the design of the Red2Onco system for comparative single-cell transcriptomics (Fig. 3a). Villin-CreERT2;R26R-Red2Onco mice (KrasG12D or PIK3CAH1047R) were induced using a mosaic dosage of tamoxifen (4 mg per 20 g body weight). Following dissociation of intestine, we used fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) to sort individual mutant (RFP+) and WT (YFP+) epithelial cells, and profiled them alongside neighbouring stromal tissue (Extended Data Fig. 6a). By combining these results with single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data from control Confetti mice, we found evidence for mutation-driven changes in gene expression in epithelial, stromal and immune cells (Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig. 6b; see Methods). Epithelial cells from Red2-KrasG12D, Red2-PIK3CAH1047R and Confetti control mice were clustered on the basis of marker-gene expression (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 6c–f, Supplementary Table 1). All major cell types were detected in ratios comparable to those reported previously31,32,33,34. Despite oncogene-induced transcriptional changes, cells from all three conditions overlapped within distinct clusters (Extended Data Fig. 6g; see Methods).

To explore the influence of oncogene activation on lineage specification, we examined the proportions of each cell type in Red2-KrasG12D and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice compared to Confetti controls. Notably, in both models, the proportion of mutant LGR5+ stem cells was significantly decreased, whereas the proportion of mutant goblet cells was increased (Extended Data Fig. 6h). In Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice, there was also an increase in the proportion of mutant enterocytes. As with mutant cells, the WT population contained a lower proportion of stem and transit-amplifying cells in both Red2Onco models (Fig. 3c, Extended Data Fig. 6i), consistent with a reduction in ISCs (Fig. 2). The reduction in ISC fraction was confirmed by immunohistochemistry and FACS (Extended Data Fig. 6j–n).
We then investigated whether changes in the fractions of stem and progenitor cells were accompanied by changes in their molecular characteristics. We first defined lineage-specific genes as molecular signatures of fate priming using scRNA-seq data from a previous study32 (Supplementary Table 2). We then calculated the priming score towards differentiation for individual WT (YFP+) and mutant (RFP+) stem and transit-amplifying cells (see Methods). In Red2-KrasG12D and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice, both WT and mutant stem and transit-amplifying cells showed enhanced differentiation towards secretory and absorptive lineages, respectively (Fig. 3d, Extended Data Fig. 7a, b); this result was confirmed by marker-based quantitative PCR with reverse transcription (qRT–PCR) analysis and immunostaining or in situ hybridization (Extended Data Fig. 7c–j). These results suggested that stem cell priming towards differentiation is a potential driver of the reduced stem cell fraction in mutant and neighbouring WT crypts in both Red2-KrasG12D and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice.
To study the mechanisms that underlie biased differentiation, we then assessed the activities of major signalling pathways2,35. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) (Supplementary Table 2; see Methods) revealed higher BMP signalling activity in both mutant and WT cells of Red2-KrasG12D and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice compared to Confetti controls, whereas WNT signalling activity was lower in both mutant and WT cells of Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice (Fig. 3e, Extended Data Fig. 7k). By contrast, NOTCH signalling activity was reduced in mutant cells, but not in WT cells, in both Red2-KrasG12D and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice (Extended Data Fig. 7l, m). On the basis of these findings, we focused on changes in BMP and WNT signalling to trace the basis of inter-crypt cellular cross-talk.
Mutant clones drive niche remodelling
We then examined direct (epithelial cell-to-cell) and indirect (via mesenchymal or immune cell) routes of communication that could affect the BMP and WNT pathways. Mesenchymal and immune cells were clustered on the basis of expression signatures (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8a–c, Supplementary Table 3). Three clusters (labelled STC for stromal cell) showed marked expression of secreted factors for intestinal stromal cells36,37 (Extended Data Fig. 8d). Notably, Bmp4 was highly expressed in cluster STC1, whereas STC2 expressed genes encoding WNT pathway-modulating factors such as Rspo3, as well as the BMP antagonist Grem1. We then searched for changes in the expression of secreted factors (Supplementary Table 4) that bind to receptors (Extended Data Fig. 8e, f) that modulate the BMP and WNT pathways. We noticed an increase in the expression of BMP ligand genes, such as Bmp2 and Bmp7, that are found mainly in mutant secretory cells in Red2-KrasG12D and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice (Fig. 3g). We also detected an increase in the expression of WNT pathway antagonist genes, such as Sfrp2 and Sfrp4, as well as a decrease in the expression of WNT pathway agonist genes, such as Rspo3, in cluster STC2 from Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice (Fig. 3h).
Changes in ligand expression in mesenchymal cells raised the possibility that the niche environment may become altered following oncogene activation. Following quantification of transcriptional changes in mesenchymal and immune cells (see Methods), we found that the STC2 population in Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice experienced significant alterations compared to other cell types (Fig. 3i, Extended Data Fig. 8g–l). In addition, this STC2 population showed increased levels of genes that regulate the extracellular matrix, such as Fn1, Mmp2 and collagens (Col6a2 and Col5a2) (Extended Data Fig. 8m). Together, these results showed that epithelial oncogene expression of either mutant KRAS or PI3K induces a BMP-rich signalling environment and, for PI3K, a WNT-poor environment (Extended Data Fig. 8n).
Blocking oncogenic niche remodelling
To validate these findings, we performed in situ hybridization for Axin2 and Id1, which are downstream target genes of the WNT and BMP pathways, respectively. As expected from our single-cell analysis, we observed decreased expression of Axin2 in both mutant and neighbouring WT crypts in Red2-PIK3CAH1047Rmice, but not in Red2-KrasG12D mice (Extended Data Fig. 9a,b). Id1 expression was increased in mutant and neighbouring WT crypts in both Red2Onco models (Extended Data Fig. 9c, d). These results were consistent with qRT–PCR data (Extended Data Fig. 9e, f), confirming that WNT activity was decreased only in Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice, whereas BMP activity was increased in both Red2Onco models. These findings were further supported by in vitro organoid assays, in which changes in BMP and WNT signalling mimicked the effects of different niche conditions (Extended Data Fig. 9g–m). In situ hybridization, qRT–PCR and organoid assays also confirmed increased expression of Bmp2 in mutant epithelial cells of both Red2Onco models (Fig. 4a, b, Extended Data Fig. 9n), as well as the functionality of epithelial BMP ligands in vitro (Extended Data Fig. 9o–r).

PDGFRAloCD81+ stromal cells are an important source of R-spondin and Gremlin-1—a WNT agonist and a BMP antagonist, respectively38. The STC2 population in our study, which showed high Rspo3 expression (Extended Data Fig. 8d), expressed high levels of Grem1 and Cd81 compared to other mesenchymal cells; consistent with previous findings38, these cells were located adjacent to the crypt base (Fig. 4c, Extended Data Fig. 10a, b). Consistent with scRNA-seq data (Fig. 3h), in situ hybridization and qRT–PCR analysis showed that STC2 cells expressed higher levels of Sfrp2 and Sfrp4, and lower levels of Rspo3, in Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice than in Red2-KrasG12D mice and Confetti controls (Fig. 4c, d, Extended Data Fig. 10b–h). To test whether oncogene-driven changes in STC2 cells compromise niche function, we co-cultured LGR5–EGFP+ ISCs with PDGFRAloCD81− STC1 cells or PDGFRAloCD81+ STC2 cells isolated from WT and Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice (Fig. 4e). As expected, the STC2 population from the WT mice supported organoid formation in growth factor-deprived conditions (lacking Noggin and with low levels of R-spondin; −Nog Rspolow), whereas the STC2 population sorted from the intestine of Red2-PIK3CAH1047R mice showed a significantly reduced capacity to support organoid formation (Fig. 4f, g).
To further test our hypothesis that BMP and WNT pathways are involved in cross-talk, we used inhibitors that block either reception of BMP ligands (LDN193189, BMP type I receptor blocking agent) or secretion of WNT ligands (LGK974, porcupine inhibitor)29. Administration of LDN193189 and LGK974 to Red2Onco mice suppressed BMP and WNT pathway signalling, respectively (Extended Data Fig. 11a, b). In addition, LDN193189 rescued the rate of clonal drift of WT clones neighbouring mutant crypts, whereas LGK974 accelerated drift still further (Fig. 4h, i, Extended Data Fig. 11c). Notably, fixation of mutant crypts was delayed by treatment with LDN193189, suggesting that unlabelled WT cells in the same crypt compete more efficiently against mutant clones when the BMP effect is abolished (Extended Data Fig. 11d, e). We also confirmed that the phenotypes from both Red2Onco systems are largely recapitulated in LSL-KrasG12D and PIK3CALat-H1047R mice, which express the respective oncogenes under the corresponding endogenous locus (Extended Data Fig. 11f–m).
Conclusions
Local cell displacement provides a mechanism for eliminating ‘loser’ cells in epithelial tissues. In this case, direct cell-to-cell competition triggers the differentiation or apoptosis of adjacent WT stem cells39,40. Our findings show that, through long-range paracrine signals, mutant cells may also affect WT cells in neighbouring domains, either directly or through oncogene-driven alterations of the shared niche environment. Alongside the two oncogenes considered here, mutants with WNT activation caused by Apc loss also show paracrine effects that result from secretion of WNT inhibitory factors (Extended Data Fig. 12), which suggests that niche remodelling may be a general feature of tumorigenic mutants.

