Tracing the origin of hair follicle stem cells
Tissue stem cells are generated from a population of embryonic progenitors through organ-specific morphogenetic events1,2. Although tissue stem cells are central to organ homeostasis and regeneration, it remains unclear how they are induced during development, mainly because of the lack of markers that exclusively label prospective stem cells. Here we combine marker-independent long-term 3D live imaging and single-cell transcriptomics to capture a dynamic lineage progression and transcriptome changes in the entire epithelium of the mouse hair follicle as it develops. We found that the precursors of different epithelial lineages were aligned in a 2D concentric manner in the basal layer of the hair placode. Each concentric ring acquired unique transcriptomes and extended to form longitudinally aligned, 3D cylindrical compartments. Prospective bulge stem cells were derived from the peripheral ring of the placode basal layer, but not from suprabasal cells (as was previously suggested3). The fate of placode cells is determined by the cell position, rather than by the orientation of cell division. We also identified 13 gene clusters: the ensemble expression dynamics of these clusters drew the entire transcriptional landscape of epithelial lineage diversification, consistent with cell lineage data. Combining these findings with previous work on the development of appendages in insects4,5, we describe the ‘telescope model’, a generalized model for the development of ectodermal organs in which 2D concentric zones in the placode telescope out to form 3D longitudinally aligned cylindrical compartments.

Main
Most ectodermal appendages, including hair follicles, form from the placode6. The hair placode elongates towards the dermis and develops into a cylindrical structure with longitudinally aligned compartments, one of which is the SOX9+ bulge stem cell compartment7,8. Previous studies have shown that SOX9+ suprabasal cells generated by the asymmetric division of basal epithelial cells of the placode become bulge stem cells1,3,9, which suggests that stem cells are first specified by asymmetric cell division. However, it remains unclear how the immature placode cells develop into the mature hair follicle structure and how organ-wide lineage diversification, including that of stem cells, is orchestrated at the cellular and transcriptional levels.
One major obstacle to studying the developmental origins of epithelial lineages is the lack of specific markers to enable the prospective identification and tracking of each cell lineage. Although basal epithelial cells in the whisker hair follicles of mice acquired the expression pattern of compartmentalized stem cell markers characteristic of mature hair follicles by embryonic day (E)17.0, the origin and early induction process of bulge stem cells could not be traced by the known adult stem cell markers SOX9, NFATc1, LHX2 or KRT15 because of wide spatiotemporal variation in expression of these markers9,10,11,12,13 (Extended Data Fig. 1).
Stem cells are derived from placode outer ring
To investigate the developmental origin and lineage dynamics of hair follicle stem cells without relying on molecular markers, we developed a long-term ex vivo culture and imaging system of whisker hair follicles that enables the observation of organ-wide progression of cell lineages14 (Extended Data Fig. 2a). Our cultured explants reflect in vivo hair follicle morphogenesis and lineage specification well (Extended Data Fig. 2b–d). Using embryonic whisker explants from transgenic mice expressing enhanced GFP-labelled histone 2B (H2B–eGFP) in the epithelium, we continuously imaged and tracked epithelial cells from the hair germ stage (E13.0) to the bulbous peg stage (E13.0 + 60 h) (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 3a–c). We colour-coded the reconstructed 3D cell trajectories according to their positions at the hair germ stage (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 3a, Supplementary Video 1). After 60 h of culture, most of the basal cells in the upper region of hair-germ-stage hair follicles (shown in red in Fig. 1a) generated basal cells in the upper region of bulbous-peg-stage hair follicles (that is, the SOX9+NFATc1+ low-proliferative prebulge region) (Extended Data Fig. 1), whereas the lower part (shown in yellow in Fig. 1a) contributed mainly to the lower region of bulbous-peg-stage hair follicles (Fig. 1a, b, Extended Data Fig. 3d–f, Supplementary Videos 1, 2). Cells adjacent to the dermal papilla (shown in blue in Fig. 1a) (hair germ cells or matrix precursors) remained at the interface between the epithelium and the dermal papilla, or detached from the basement membrane and differentiated. Our data indicate that each longitudinally aligned compartment of the basal epithelium in the early-to-middle stages of hair follicle morphogenesis is induced by enlarging each of the early compartments, rather than being sequentially added by the cell supply from the leading hair germ (shown in blue in Fig. 1a) or other regions. Thus, prospective bulge stem cells are located in the upper region of hair-germ-stage hair follicles and mostly form the prebulge compartment, but do not substantially contribute to other basal compartments during morphogenesis.

To identify the origin and earlier lineage dynamics of hair follicle epithelial cells, we obtained live imaging data from the hair placode stage using KRT14-rtTA (hereafter K14-rtTA);TetO-H2B-eGFP;Fucci-G1 mice (Supplementary Videos 2, 3). We performed retrospective cell tracking from the hair germ stage to the placode stage, which revealed that epithelial cells located adjacent to the dermal papilla (shown in blue in Fig. 1c) were originally located at the centre of the basal layer of the placode (Fig. 1c, d, Extended Data Fig. 3g, h, Supplementary Video 4). Cells in the lower region (shown in yellow in Fig. 1c) were derived from immediately outside the centre region of the placode shown in blue in Fig. 1c. Cells in the upper region (shown in red in Fig. 1c) (putative prospective bulge stem cells) were derived from the peripheral ring of the basal layer of the placode. Suprabasal cells located inside of the hair follicles (shown in green in Fig. 1c) were derived from both suprabasal and basal cells that abut the dermal condensate at the placode stage. Suprabasal cells with a flat nucleus at the placode stage (shown in cyan in Fig. 1c, e) (equivalent to SOX9+ suprabasal cells in Extended Data Figs. 1a, b, 5e) did not contribute to the basal layer or hair follicle formation (Fig. 1c, e, Extended Data Fig. 3i, Supplementary Video 5).
Our results demonstrate that (1) the origin of the longitudinally aligned cylindrical compartments of the epithelium of the whisker hair follicle in three dimensions are mapped as 2D concentric rings in the basal layer of the placode, (2) only cells in the basal layer of the epithelium contribute to follicle formation, (3) prospective bulge stem cells are derived from epithelial basal cells in the placode periphery, (4) 3D epithelial cylindrical compartments are formed by enlarging each 2D concentric zone in the placode and (5) prospective bulge stem cells do not substantially contribute to forming other basal compartments during hair follicle morphogenesis (Extended Data Fig. 3j).
Position governs placode cell fate
It has previously been reported that the hair follicle stem cells of dorsal hair follicles are derived from SOX9+WNTlow suprabasal cells that are generated by perpendicular and asymmetric cell divisions of placode basal cells3. To assess the relationship between the cell division orientation and later cell fate in the early development of whisker hair follicles, we measured the orientation of cell division against the basement membrane zone three-dimensionally in the basal layer of the epithelium across the placode and interfollicular epidermis (IFE) in our live imaging data (Extended Data Fig. 4). We categorized cells into horizontally and perpendicularly divided cell groups in each tissue region, and tracked the fates of their daughter cells up to the hair germ stage (Fig. 2a, b, Extended Data Fig. 5a, b). Irrespective of the angle of cell division, most daughter cells from the basal layer of the placode of prospective upper, lower and hair germ regions contributed to basal cells in upper, lower and hair germ regions of the hair germ stage, respectively (Fig. 2a). Moreover, both upper and lower daughter cells of perpendicular division in the prospective upper region contributed significantly (Extended Data Fig. 5b) to forming the prospective stem cell region as compared to other regions (shown in red in Fig. 2b). Throughout development, upper daughter cells produced by perpendicular division often remained in the basal layer and acquired a cell fate according to their position (Supplementary Video 6). Furthermore, upper daughter cells in the basal layer of the placode remained positive for LHX2, whereas SOX9+ suprabasal cells were negative for LHX2 (Extended Data Fig. 5c). These observations suggest that upper daughter cells retain some—if not all—of the properties of basal cells immediately after cell division and are distinct from SOX9+ suprabasal cells. Together, these results indicate that the fate of epithelial cells in the whisker placode is determined by the cell position within the placode, regardless of the orientation of cell division.

We next asked whether prospective bulge stem cells were derived from Sox9-expressing or SOX9+ suprabasal cells in the placode. We first confirmed that there are two distinct SOX9+ cell populations in the placodes of whisker and dorsal hair follicles (Extended Data Fig. 5d, e). As has previously been reported3,9, suprabasal cells showed a high expression of SOX9. However, basal cells at the placode periphery also exhibited moderate expression of SOX9. We established a long-term explant ex vivo culture system using embryonic dorsal skin that recapitulates the formation of first- and second-wave hair follicles in vivo (Extended Data Fig. 5f–h, Supplementary Video 7, 8). We performed 4D tracking, which revealed that different lineages of hair follicle epithelial cells were mapped as 2D concentric rings in the basal layer of the placode—as we observed in whisker hair follicles (Extended Data Fig. 5i–l). We subsequently investigated the fate of Sox9-expressing cells using live imaging data of dorsal skin explants from Sox9-IRES-eGFP;Rosa26 (hereafter R26)-H2B-mCherry mice. We detected eGFP signals first in the suprabasal layer of placodes, which was followed by expression at the periphery of the basal layer of the placode (Fig. 2c, Supplementary Video 8), consistent with the expression strength and pattern of SOX9 immunostaining results (Extended Data Fig. 5d). Our retrospective tracking of these Sox9- and eGFP-expressing cells confirmed that only cells initially located in the basal layer of pre-placodes and placodes contributed to the basal layer at the hair germ stage. These cells mainly gave rise to the upper cells at the hair germ stage (prospective bulge stem cells), whereas Sox9- and eGFP-expressing suprabasal cells did not contribute to the basal layer of the hair germ stage, including the upper cells (Fig. 2d–f, Extended Data Fig. 5m–o, Supplementary Video 5). We also performed live imaging with skin explants from Sox9-creERt2;R26R-H2B-mCherry;K14-H2B-eGFP mice. We induced Sox9-creERt2-mediated recombination at the hair placode stage, and retrospectively traced H2B–mCherry+ cells from the hair germ stage to the placode stage (Extended Data Fig. 5p). As we observed in the Sox9-IRES-eGFP mouse experiments, H2B–mCherry+ suprabasal cells did not contribute to the basal layer of the hair germ stage, whereas H2B–mCherry+ basal cells gave rise to prospective bulge stem cells (Extended Data Fig. 5q, r). Therefore, our findings suggest that the discrepancy in the origin of bulge stem cells is due to the presence of two functionally distinct subpopulations of SOX9+ cells in the placode.
Accurate time-course single-cell RNA sequencing
We examined how epithelial cells changed their cellular states progressively to generate diverse epithelial cells, including prospective bulge stem cells. Embryonic skin tissues contain various types of hair follicle at different developmental stages, which makes the separation and transcriptional profiling of hair follicles at specific developmental stages difficult. We thus developed a ROSA26 reporter line expressing photo-convertible fluorescent protein (nuclear Kikume Green–Red (nKikGR))15, which enabled us to photo-label target hair follicles under the microscope. Hereafter, all RNA tissue-staining and sequencing data were obtained from embryo skin rather than from explants. Entire single-whisker hair follicles from E12.0, E13.0, E13.5, E14.0, E15.0 and E17.0 embryos were photo-converted (Extended Data Fig. 6a, b, Supplementary Video 9). Photo-converted single cells of the basal epithelium were isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (Extended Data Fig. 6c–l), and then subjected to a sensitive and accurate total single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) technique known as random displacement amplification sequencing (RamDA-seq)16.
Among sequenced libraries, we identified 962 single-cell transcriptomes of epithelial subpopulations (Extended Data Fig. 7a–c) and assigned them linked embryonic stages in a t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-SNE) plot (Extended Data Fig. 7d, e). The transcriptomes appeared to be arranged by stage, and shifted their position gradually from the top left to the bottom right according to embryonic stage. We then identified 16 cell clusters using unbiased clustering (Extended Data Fig. 7f, g). We assigned the in vivo spatial locations of these clusters using in situ hybridization with their cluster marker genes and linked stage information (Extended Data Figs. 7f, h–k, 8). Lmo1 and BC100530 (also known as Cstdc5) (which mark clusters 5 and 6), Nfatc1 and Tgfb2 (which mark clusters 7–12), Smtn and Vdr (which mark clusters 7, 11 and 13), and Shh and Wnt10b (which mark clusters 2, 7 and 14) labelled the IFE and infundibulum, upper and lower bulge stem cells, stalk cells and hair germ, respectively. This analysis revealed distinct compartmentalized expression patterns along the longitudinal axis of hair follicles throughout development (Extended Data Fig. 8). When we traced E17.0-derived cell populations from the lower to the upper part of the t-SNE plot, the in vivo spatial position of each cell population shifted gradually from the upper to the lower part of the hair follicle (Extended Data Fig. 7k). These data suggest that our scRNA-seq libraries contain a variety of cell types in the epithelia of developing whisker hair follicles with accurate stage and spatial mapping information, which makes these libraries suitable for delineating the spatiotemporal dynamics of cellular-state transitions during hair follicle morphogenesis.
Placode concentric transcriptional zones
To examine whether the 2D concentric lineage zones had already acquired distinct cellular states, we first reconstructed a pseudospace trajectory with E12.0-derived transcriptomes17,18 (Fig. 3a). Using epithelial lineage markers, we confirmed that cells were 2D-aligned according to their in vivo locations from the placode centre to the IFE (Fig. 3b, c). We used these pseudospace scRNA-seq data to identify 4,342 genes with significant variations of expression across the pseudospace, and sorted them into 20 clusters (Fig. 3d). Many of these genes peaked in the placode centre or IFE regions; however, substantial numbers of genes—including the stem cell markers Nfatc1 and Sox9—showed peaks between these regions. In vivo, the spatially restricted genes showed ring-like expression patterns of different diameters and widths (Fig. 3e, Extended Data Fig. 9a–e), which indicates the presence of concentric zones with gradual gene-expression changes from the placode centre to the IFE (Fig. 3f). This observation is consistent with previous studies that have shown ring-like gene expression around the placode19,20.

We further examined the expression patterns of genes related to particular signalling pathways and found that the basal epithelium of the placode forms gradients of signalling pathway activities from the placode centre to the periphery. The placode periphery is in part characterized by a WNTlowBMPhigh state (the characteristics of adult bulge stem cells21) (Extended Data Fig. 9f–j). Consequently, our two marker-independent single-cell omics experiments revealed similar concentric patterns in the basal placode—the lineage concentric zone and the gene-expression concentric zone. Because presumptive bulge stem cells were derived from the border between the placode and the IFE, the outer ring with stem cell marker expression in Fig. 3e, f is highly likely to represent the stem cell origin and its cellular state.
Tissue-wide transcriptional coordination
To analyse how different epithelial populations diversified in developing hair follicles, we reconstructed developmental trajectories of basal epithelial cells with diffusion maps after removing terminally differentiated cells from transcriptomes (Fig. 4a–c, Extended Data Fig. 10a–c). We obtained five-way paths that led to the infundibulum, upper bulge stem cells, lower bulge stem cells, stalk cells and hair germ cells. Even if there was a concentric gene-expression pattern in the E12.0 placode, E11.5- and E12.0-derived cells would tightly cluster at the centre of diffusion maps (owing to the smaller difference in their gene expression compared to mature cells). Despite this, the diffusion map showed that the hair germ lineage first branched at E12.0 (arrows in Fig. 4c, Extended Data Fig. 10a, b), whereas the other lineages diversified from E13.5 (open arrowheads in Fig. 4c, Extended Data Fig. 10a, b). On the basis of information about the reconstructed hair germ lineage and the strong and continuous expression of hair germ lineage markers (Shh and Wnt10b) in this lineage (Extended Data Figs. 7j, 8, 9a–e), the hair germ lineage developed from hair placode cells through cluster 2 at E12.0, as a part of cluster 7 at E13.0 and then as cluster 14 from E13.5 onward (Extended Data Fig. 10b). Because cells expressing Shh and Wnt10b appear at E12.0 and remain in the same cluster after E13.5 (Extended Data Figs. 7d, f, 8), we suggest that hair germ cells and their precursors are specified early in the development of hair follicles. On the other hand, we observed strong expression of lineage markers for infundibular cells (BC100530), bulge stem cells (Nfatc1) and stalk cells (Vdr) from E13.0 (Extended Data Fig. 8). From E13.0 to E17.0, these lineages gradually diversified and shifted their location on the t-SNE plot (Extended Data Figs. 7d, f, 10b), which suggests that specification and maturation of non-hair-germ lineages occurred progressively along with hair follicle elongation. The inferred developmental trajectories of upper stem cells (clusters 8, 9 and 10), lower stem cells (clusters 8, 11 and 12) and stalk cells (clusters 11 and 13) were supported by RNA velocity analysis (Extended Data Fig. 10d).

To characterize transcriptional dynamics during hair follicle development, we detected temporally up- and downregulated genes in each lineage progression. We identified 13 gene clusters, which established the ensemble dynamics of gene expression in whole epithelia of developing hair follicles (Fig. 4d, e). Four gene clusters (1, 2, 3 and 7) showed similar changes in gene expression across the five cell lineages, which upregulated at distinct times. Gene cluster 1 was related to interactions between the cell and extracellular matrix, as well as WNT signalling, whereas gene cluster 7 was related to cell proliferation (Fig. 4d, Extended Data Fig. 10e). Conversely, gene clusters 5, 6 and 8–13 represent groups of genes that are coordinately regulated as the infundibulum, upper and lower stem cells, stalk cells and hair germ are induced. Gene clusters 6, 9 and 10 showed genes that are upregulated in late pseudotime of stem cell lineages, and contained many markers and BMP-signalling target genes for adult bulge stem cells (including Nfatc1, Sox9 and Lhx2)22,23 (Extended Data Fig. 10f). Together with the data from the placode stage (Extended Data Fig. 9f–j), our transcriptome analyses suggest that the prospective bulge stem cell lineage acquires a WNTlowBMPhigh state at the placode stage and maintains this cellular state throughout hair follicle development. The induction of upper stem cells was marked by successive waves of gene activation of gene clusters 1–7, 9 and 10, indicating gradual induction through dynamic transcriptional changes (Fig. 4d). Collectively, our single-cell transcriptional analysis identified dynamic waves of 13 transcriptional programmes associated with the diversification of cell lineages (Fig. 4e). These reconstructed cell lineages and their spatial organization were consistent with those that we obtained in direct cell-lineage tracking from live imaging data, which leads us to the conclusion that prospective bulge stem cells are derived from the periphery of 2D concentric zones and develop into the mature, cylindrical stem cell compartments.
Discussion
We built a dynamic atlas of developing hair follicles, which revealed a telescope-like mode of morphogenesis in which each 2D concentric lineage and gene-expression zone in the placode extends to form the longitudinally aligned 3D cylindrical compartments. We propose that this model, which is common to different types of hair follicle, be known as the ‘telescope model’ for coordinated hair follicle morphogenesis and stem cell induction. Our proposed model resembles the development of the Drosophila appendages4,5, and it might therefore be a general developmental model that underlies the formation of cylindrical structures from the flat placode and the 3D transformation of positional information during ectodermal organ development.
Our findings indicate that the determination of the fate of cells in the placode depends on the position of the cells in the tissue. Several bulge stem cell markers (including Sox9 and Nfatc1) were upregulated at the peripheral zone of the basal layer of the placode in a WNTlowBMPhigh state, which suggests the formation of a primitive niche for the induction of bulge stem cells. Consistent with this notion, a previous study in which Smad1 and Smad5 were deleted in the embryonic epidermis resulted in a reduction of the expression of SOX9 and NFATc1 and a lack of prebulge formation24. Moreover, small patched activation of β-catenin signalling in the early embryonic epidermis has previously been shown to induce SOX9 expression in the surrounding cells, forming a ring-like zone of SOX9 expression3. Thus, WNT or β-catenin signal-active basal epithelial cells at the centre of the placode may induce a WNTlowBMPhigh state in the juxtaposed region. This cellular and extracellular state could serve as a niche for the origin of stem cells, probably under the reaction–diffusion system formed by interplay with the underlying mesenchymal dermal condensate25,26. This could be a mechanism to induce the concentric pattern in the placode along with the migration of epithelial and mesenchymal cells towards the centre of the pre-placode27,28. Our study provides a foundation for future work to investigate the mechanisms that couple skin organogenesis with signal and cellular compartmentalization, leading to the emergence of stem cells and their niche.

